Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs and the
MG by Doctor Adam Tun. He is Associate Professor
of Philosophy at the University of Exeter and Deputy
Director at Agents, the Center for the Study of
Life Sciences. And today we're talking about his book
Mind as metaphor, a defense of mental fictional. So,
Doctor Tun, welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thank you very much for inviting me.
So, since we're talking about the mind here today,
and of course, as the subtitle suggests, we're going
to try to defend a mental fictional list position
here today. But uh of course, there's several different
ideas that people have about the mind. Some of
them come from more, let's say common people, uh
the common folk and others from philosophers. But starting
with the more common ones, there's this idea of
folk psychology, what is it and how does it
apply in the context of what you're exploring in
your book?
Yeah. Thank you. Um The, you, you, it's surprisingly
difficult to say exactly what folk psychology is, which
is, which is strange given that it's supposed to
be something we know, uh, very well. Um, SO,
so roughly speaking, it's supposed to be the sort
of, um, common sense understanding of the mind that
we're all employing every day. Um, USUALLY without thinking
about it, um, when we say things like someone
wants a cup of coffee or, uh, they think
the meeting is in such and such a room
or they hope that, um, they'll get a pay
rise next year or what have you in, in
other words, the thought is simply that, um, we
in a sense know an awful lot about the
mind in our everyday life. Um, AND the sense
in which we know that is we're very good
at using, um, l a whole set of um,
terms to describe uh the minds of others and
ourselves, like, uh wanting and hoping and fearing and
thinking and understanding and so on. Um, AND, um,
one place to start as it were in the
philosophy of mind in, in, uh, in other words,
in trying to understand what the mind is, is
to sort of begin from that, um, fluid use
of those concepts within everyday life and to try
to give an interpretation of it. And, and that's
where I suppose a lot of the shouting begins
as to how you, how you make sense of
it and what it tells you about the mind.
So a very common idea and this, I guess
applies not only to common people, but also to
intellectuals in general is that we tend to think
about the mind as an inner world. Why is
that important here? And what do you think about
that idea?
I, I think it is a very common idea.
Um A, as you say, both within philosophy but
also other, other disciplines, um closely associated disciplines like
parts of cognitive science, but, but also in, in,
in all sorts of areas of, of, of academia
and everyday life. Um And in, in the book,
I call it Cartesian is, although I, I realize
that that's not necessarily historically accurate, I'm sure lots
of Descartes scholars would take me up on that.
But, but um it's kind of just a measure
of how influential Descartes is that you can, you
can use his name in all sorts of sorts
of ways. Um But, but I think that idea
of the mind is, is an, the world is
um uh very important, very common. Um And we
often talk about it in everyday life without really
noticing, you know, well, in my head, I'm thinking
that such and such or, you know, just deep
down inside, I think that idea is not gonna
work or what have you. So, so it is
important um within philosophy, I suppose there have been
roughly speaking, two attitudes you could take towards it
to take towards that, that idea of mind as
an inner world, you could try as it were
to take it seriously. In other words, you could
try to give an account of what that inner
world is. Um And we can talk about different
versions of that approach, different versions of what I'm
calling Cartesian is. Um OF course, uh in the
past, many more philosophers might have been willing to
say that that inner world is something non material.
It's, they might have talked about it as a
soul or spirit. Um IN that sense, it's not
strictly speaking inner. Although of course, then we get
to lots of the problems with, with that view
um of, of trying to, to say how it,
how it um interacts with the body. Um OR
the much more common approach nowadays, of course, is
some variety of materialism when you uh might say,
well, that world is literally in a, in that
it's located somewhere in physical space and, and the
brain is typically where um where it's located. So,
um so, so Cartesian is in that broad sense
of, of that mind as in a world can
come in in dualist and, and materialist versions. Um
So that's as it were one strand and saying,
well, we have this talk about mind as in
a world. Um Let's try to, to sort of
make sense of that, to, to, to understand what
the mind is, what that inner world is. Is
it something physical? Is it something non-physical? Then there's
another strand probably less dominant, especially nowadays, um and
behaviorism would be the kind of key example here
which says, look, this talk about the inner world
is suspect in some way or other. Um So
we should try to do without it. Um And
we should try, let's say to um in the
classic version of behaviorism to, to um translate the
talk about the inner world, to talk about patterns
of behavior, something like that. And I guess one
way of trying to put the, the you mentioned
this term mental fiction is which is a kind
of label you can use for the view. I'm
I'm trying to push um would be to s
be in a way something that sits between those
two positions. So that says on the one hand,
Cartesian is, is right to say that this notion
of the inner world is uh important and we
can't do away with it like the behaviorist to
do. But on the other hand, um uh we
shouldn't follow Cartesian is in taking that in a
world seriously. In other words, we shouldn't think that
it exists. So, so the overall position is to
say we have this notion of part of everyday
life and philosophy of mind as an inner world.
And that's a useful fiction. In other words, it's
part and parcel of our language in a sense.
We can't, at least in our culture, we can't
avoid thinking about people in those ways. Um But
strictly speaking, there is no such inner world, it's
a useful fiction for making sense, ultimately, of, of
behavior.
So we'll come back to mental future because I
want to explore some uh a little bit more
about it and also some of its implications, of
course, but you mentioned several different philosophical approaches to
the mind there and I would like to break
them down a little bit further. So one that
is very prevalent nowadays as well is thinking about
the mind as a machine. And uh it's interesting
that uh you're talking about metaphors in the book
and uh a very relevant metaphor nowadays that I
guess uh it is like that because we tend
to derive metaphors from the kind of many times
from the kinds of technologies that we use in
the mind as a computer. So what do you
make of it? What are perhaps some of its
uh limitations if you think that it has any?
Mm Yes, I th I think, I mean, I
think you're right to, to point to the importance
of um a, a sort of um a mechanistic
type thinking in one way to put the inner
world idea is it's usually cashed out today would
be a sort of inner mechanism. Um And um
you know, the history here is complicated but, but
certainly beginning, at least with the British empiricist, you
seem to see this idea that um you know,
in, in the, the, the famous um uh uh
association of hume of being the sort of Newton
of the inner world rather than the outer, this
thought that ideas are somehow uh items that have
um what, what Ryall would call para mechanical. So
in other words, not quite mechanical, but um something,
something rather close, even if a bit spookier um
that, that we should try to discover that, that
associate between ideas and uh between our ideas for,
for instance. Um So, uh and now I, I
suppose that that um you know, Cartesian is in,
in, in the sort of materialist form that I
mentioned. You, you, you, you mentioned the computational view
is one way to see that is in an
attempt to make, to make um that idea something
we, we take literally not metaphorically, right to say
that in some sense, the mind literally is a
computer. Um uh FOR instance, um and, and to
sort of, of course, computation is one very powerful
means that people have tried to use to sort
of cash out that in internal mechanism view of
mine and see how it, how it could be
made to work, you know, how, how could it
be that we could have these states that um
uh that represent the world that cause other states
to arise, cause behavior and, and so on. And
that's, that's been enormously powerful. Um I suppose my,
my own view there would, would go back to
what I said earlier that this, that this way
of talking, it seems to me um of a
mind as in a mechanisms on is um n
not only there in uh in philosophy and in
particularly sophisticated versions like the computational theory of mind
um but also part of, of everyday life, I
think, I think Carss uh uh uh Cartesian's are
right to say that. Um I don't know how
long it's been part of our everyday sort of
mind. I mean, you know, mechanism, of course, is
something that people often associate with. Um THE, you
know, the scientific revolution as they would put it
from the, the early modern period onwards. But I
do think it's, it's that kind of thinking about
the inner world is part and parcel of our,
of our everyday concept by now, at least. Um
But I want to say that it, it is
metaphorical. Um IN other words, uh one way to
see that I think is to um to try
to push uh um folk view of that inner
world um to uh as far as you can
to try to um to push it towards being
uh taken literally. And then I think you see
that our ordinary um folk psychology starts to back
off a little bit. And that's one indication that
what we're doing is using a very powerful set
of metaphors, inner machinery of inner states and so
on. Um TO make sense of people without being
committed to thinking that um uh the mine really
isn't in a machine.
Mhm. And what about the position of illuminati is?
Uh, I would like to understand what it is
exactly. And I, if it relates at all to
mental fictional is because II, I mean, uh, uh,
because it's one thing to think about the mind
as a fiction and I guess another thing to
just, uh, try to get rid of the mind
entirely or reducing it to just whatever happens in
the brain. And then if you want to add
something on top of that, I mean, if you
can't find it directly in the brain, then it's
just not there, I guess.
Yes. Yes, I think IIII, I think you're right.
I mean, so I, I suppose as I've tried
to, this might sound surprising. It's pa partly as
a result of the way I'm using this, this
um uh terminology to divide up the terrain here.
But, but I suppose one way to put it
would be that I see, I limit is in
a way as um a variety of Cartesian is.
In other words, what Ali is, seems to do
is to broadly speaking, accept the idea that our
ordinary concept of mind is an attempt to describe
it in a world. So that when we attribute
beliefs and desires and hopes and fears and so
on to people, we're attempting to pick out a
state of their inner machinery. Um It's just that
the illuminators is pretty pessimistic about that theory and
thinks that, um, well, like, as they, as they
will say, lots of folk theories, um it may
well turn out not to be particularly good. And
as a result, if you think that say beliefs
and desires are, are posits, they're, they're, they're, they're
something akin to atoms that folk are conjuring up
in order to explain the observable um behavior in
this case, then they're hostages to fortune. Then it
it could turn out that our final cognitive science
will not find a place for beliefs, desires, hopes,
fears, and, and so on. So so that I
suppose the way I would see it is that
um I in a sense, both something like the
computational theory of mind and the limit of it
have this kind of common starting point of thinking
that what the folk are doing, what our ordinary
concept of mind is doing is attempting to describe
an inner machinery, the computation list, at least in
some forms. And, and Jerry Fodor and the, and
the classical computation theory would be the, the best
example here is an attempt to show how that
folk view can be made as it were scientifically
respectable, how we we could turn out to have
these inner states. Whereas others like the Churchland and
Paul and Patricia, Churchland would be examples of people
who seem to accept the same starting point. That's
what it would really be for us to have
beliefs and desires but to be much more pessimistic
and place a different bet on the future of
cognitive science. And I guess what I'm saying is,
I think the fictional list rejects that common starting
point. They reject the idea that what the folk
are doing, what the concept of mind is doing
is trying to pick out an inner world. Um
So that, that would be how I would understand
the difference. It could be that um There are,
there are other ways in which, um uh there's
a li a little different to the way some,
some people who are fictional lists in different domains
might, might see the relationship between fictional and lit.
But uh yeah,
so another approach that you also mentioned earlier that
today is not very popular is behaviorism. So what
do you think that are perhaps some of the
biggest difficulties that it faces when approaching the mind?
And does it relate to a fictional is in
any way at all or?
I think so? I think so. I mean, um
uh iii I know that, so that the term
be, you know, the, the name, behaviorism, of course,
um, a term you're quite right in, in some
areas doesn't, um, uh have AAA great reputation nowadays.
So perhaps I, I should distance myself from it
as far as possible. And I do think there
are differences between fiction and behaviorism. Although I, I
think behaviorism's given a bit more of a bad
reputation than it than it really deserves. Actually, there's
a, there's a, some forms are, are, are, are
um uh I, I think um are really onto
something. Um BUT um perhaps 11 way to put
the point in general um would be to say
that it seems to me and this, this goes
back to what I said earlier. If, if Cartesian
is, is on one side as, as taking the
inner world seriously and thinking that in a sense
for the mind to exist, the inner world has
to exist. And then behaviorism and associated ideas seem
roughly speaking to be trying to do away with
that notion of the inner world. And I said
that in a sense where fictional is sits as
I see, it is kind of between those two
views. It says, well, we need to retain this
idea of the inner world. But as a useful
fiction, I think that can help to explain um
the difficulties or the the problems that behaviorism got
into and how fiction is can avoid them. So
let, let me give you one example. Um uh
THE, the kind of classic way of understanding behavior
is at least in philosophy is to say that
what it's really trying to do is um to
do without talk about inner states. In other words,
to show how um a a claim about say
someone's beliefs or desires uh can be translated to
a claim about their behavior about what they would
do under certain circumstances. So it's an attempt to
sort of to do away with that m mental
as it's sometimes called or talk about um about
the inner world and translate it into to talk
about behavior. And, and that, that project is often
said to be to be doomed. Um It, from
the perspective of fiction is I think the failure
of that project of, of translating, talk about the
mind to talk about behavior turns out to be
a, a very um general feature of our, of
our language, which is um that, that we often
need metaphors. In other words, we often can't translate
metaphors into um uh straightforward literal paraphrases. So I,
I think that this notion of mind is an
inner world is like a lot of metaphors, is
adding richness to our language is allowing us to
say things about people that we can't say otherwise.
Um And that's why at least that classic form
of behaviorism which tries to do without talk about
the inner world fails. That's why we, we can't
do without that um feature of a, a language.
And I think you can say the same about
some other um uh theories of mind um that
are, are sort of akin to behaviorism. Like instrumental
is for instance, that, that the sort of key
mistake that they make is if, if the Cartesian
takes the inner world too seriously, views like behaviorism,
I think don't take it seriously enough in the
sense that they don't see that it's doing something
for us. And one of the things that it's
doing is adding richness of expression that it's adding
to our powers of expression. So that, that would
be one way in which I would try at
least to make the case that some of the,
the, the well known um uh problems with behaviorism
are not, um uh uh are not fatal to
the fiction list. Yeah.
Uh By the way, for the audience specifically, you
mentioned instrumental is there, could you tell us a
little bit more about what is, what it is
basically?
Yes, I, I try the, the um I suppose
that the, the instru an instrumentalist position would be
similar to behaviorism and what, what behaviorism. So the
views here are complicated and I'm simplifying a little
bit but, but the, the classic form of behaviorism
might be to say something like, look, uh when
I say some, for instance, someone uh wants an
ice cream. So I say, you know, or I
say they, they, they desire ice cream. I'm um
I'm not trying to pick out some uh um
state in their uh in their head or in
their inner machinery or what have you that has
that content that's gonna cause them to do something.
I'm really just saying something like if you give
them a chance, they'll buy an ice cream, something
like that, right? So, in other words, if under
these situations, you know, standing in front of an
ice cream shop, they will do something, go and
buy an ice cream. And of course, you know,
one of the very well known problems for, for
behavior is in that very simplistic form is that,
um uh roughly speaking, what we do under certain
circumstances seems to depend not just on one mental
state, we might have like the desire for ice
cream, but all sorts of other mental states. So,
you know, if we think that this shop is
charging too much for its ice cream, however much
we want one. THAT belief, this is extortionate um
will result in a different behavior which is walking
down the road instead and trying to find another
shop or something like that. Or if we've already,
if we know perfectly well, we've had two ice
creams already today. Despite our love for ice cream,
we might not buy one and so on. So,
so one reason it seems that we can't translate
at least attributions as philosophers put it of individual
mental states to behavior seems to be that um
a kind of holism that, that what we do
seems to, it would depend on not just any
a particular mental state that we have like a
desire for ice cream, but all sorts of others
like the desire not to spend too much money
or the, the belief that, you know, £3.50 is
extortionate for a for an ice Lolly or whatever
it is. Right. So, um and I suppose that
sort of connectedness that holism of mental states is
what the instrumentalist tries to say, take seriously to
say, um Roughly speaking, that what we're doing when
we attribute a mental state is we're, we're very
often attributing m far more than one. And we're
giving a sort of um uh convenient description that
allows us to um uh to pick out a
pattern of behavior. Um So, what we're doing is
roughly speaking, well, saying, well, you can make sense
of someone's behavior if you um uh you know,
the, the were to plug in this belief and
this desire and that will explain, that will explain
is perhaps a bit more of a contentious way
of putting it, describe at least what they will,
what they will do. Um So, so in a
sense that the instrumentalist is um a a allows
for that um uh thought that what we do
depends on more than one mental state that we
have. Nevertheless, like the behaviorist, the instrumentalists will typically
want to do without the idea of inner states.
They'll just say this is just a kind of
convenient machinery um for predicting behavior. And it's just
that we have to plug in more than one
mental state into that machinery to chug out a
particular answer. But still, we're not talking about an
inner world. That's, that's roughly as one way of
putting the, the idea of um uh of instrumental.
Um And again, the key way that fiction is,
differs from that is saying, no, no, no, there
is um there is a, a reference to an
inner, an inner world. There is um and, and
there are classic thought experiments that are often brought
up to try to show that instrumental is, is
um is mistaken. Um And we could talk about
some of those if you like. But the, the
blockhead is one famous example where you're supposed to
imagine a robot, which whose sort of external behavior
is seemingly indistinguishable from a regular um flesh and
blood person, but who just has this sort of
giant look up table inside of what's an appropriate
thing to do. You know, if ice cream costs
more than £3.50 then say no, thank you and
move on or what have you. And the intuition
that, that th thought experiments like that are, are
often said to elicit is the thought that you
would say, OK, if that's how things are going
on inside, then this, this being wouldn't have a
mind. So in other words, they're, they're often said
to show that we care about more than external
behavior. And again, I want to say, well, that's
because this notion of it in a world is
part and parcel of our concept of mind. Um
But it, but it's one as I said that
I think we, we use as a useful fiction
that we, that we treat metaphorical.
Yeah. So let's just do one more approach before
we go back to mental fictional is. And I
guess that it's important for us to cover this
one because the, the author behind it is a
very prominent philosopher. So, what do you make of
Daniel Dennett s approach to the mind?
Hm. Um I think, yes, I, I think it,
it is a very important, um, approach and, um,
uh, and it's possibly as, as I see it
anyway, Dennett may well, well, we disagree. I know.
Um, uh, SO, um, Dan Dennett very kindly, uh,
contributed a, um, a, a paper to avoid your
moment. Fiction is that I edited last year and
I think the title is, am I a fictional
list? And, and the, the first sentence is something
like, well, sort of, yes and no. Um, AND
I think, you know, he's quite rightly often resisted
quick labels for the position that, that he has
and that includes instrumental. It also includes fictional. So,
um, so, you know, um, sometimes these labels aren't,
aren't helpful and, and then its views, a very
sophisticated one, I think what I would say is,
it seems to me that there are important similarities
between, um, the kind of fiction view that I
want to put forward and Dennes position and that
perhaps the kind of machinery that I want to,
um, to use to, um, uh, to cash out
this fiction, this view can explain some of the
can try to again avoid some of the problems
that, that, that den it's view is sometimes said
to, to have. So perhaps I'll give you one
example of that. So, so um uh the, the,
the view that I would want to put forward
to say, well, what does it mean really to
say that we treat the mind as a, a
useful fiction, We treat the inner world as useful
fiction. Well, it's something like um uh the, the,
the Cartesian says, um well, well, we attribute a
belief, for instance, we're roughly speaking, saying someone's got
an inner state with a certain content that causes
them to behave in a certain way. And the
way I would see it is that what we're
doing is uh um roughly speaking, pretending that someone's
got a certain inner state, right? Um We're using
that as a useful metaphor. We're saying it's as
if they were guided by this inner state. Um
uh But we don't take that too seriously. We
treat it as a metaphor and I think that
perhaps this is something we'll come onto later. Um
I think that the source for that metaphor, that
the, the as it were the domain that gives
us those, the richness of those ideas of inner
states is um roughly speaking, um external representations, especially
language. So roughly, we talk as if people had
something like language inside their heads that captures their
beliefs and desires and causes them to behave in
certain ways. Um um Even though they don't. Um
So, so if I go back to, to, to
den, it's view, um uh I, I, in his
terms, taking the, what he calls the intentional stance
to somebody, of course, is often glossed in a
similar way. It's to say we treat people as
if they had beliefs and desires for instance, and
we don't care too much perhaps about their inner
machinery when we, when we do that. Um So
the, so there does, I think even though as
I said, I, I'm not sure that Dennett would
light the label of, of fiction is there does
seem to be something similar there. And another similarity
is that I think that um then it would
um and say that there are, as he puts
it real patterns in our behavior that are picked
out by talking in that way. And I think
the fiction is, can say the same thing. There
are real patterns in our behavior that are picked
out by these metaphors by this, by this fiction.
Um Perhaps just to indicate one way in which
I think this machinery of, of fictional can, can
help to avoid some, some problems that, that Dennett
view is often said to have one problem is
people are worried well, if all of our talk
um about functionality as it's put about thoughts and
so on, has this is, it involves taking the
intentional stance. Has this kind of a, as if
structure, well, then there's no literal case to make
sense of that. So if I, it looks as
if, you know, if I uh want to pretend
to be a bear, I have to at least
know what a real bear is, right? Um Or,
you know, uh if I pretend to be a
pirate, I have to at least have some idea
about what a, what a a pirate really uh
is and so on. And people have said well,
but I, I if we um think along with
Dennett that taking the intentional stance is always talking
as if people have beliefs and desires say, well,
what is it really to have a belief and
desire? Now again, I want to say, well, whether
or not that's a fair worry for, for Denne,
it's view, I think the fictional list view can
meet it. And that's because as I said earlier,
what really cashes out this pretense I think is
something else, something external particularly written and spoken language.
So we know what it is to say things
um that have meaning for instance. And then we
talk as if people had something a bit like
that in their heads. So it's the, it, it,
in my view, and I think this is a
key difference with Dennett, I would say in a
sense it's language, it's external representations that come first
and that provide the stock of metaphors that we
then project inside to, to create the, as if
intentionality of the mental. And I, and as I
read to him anyway, I think that's probably quite
a big difference from Dennes view and, and he,
um, I don't think would want to accept that
view of intentionality. Um, AS I've said though, it
seems to me that it gets, um, at the
fiction is a response to some really important objections
that are raised against um views like, like Dennis,
the intentional stance.
Mhm So we'll come back to some of the
things you mentioned there, particularly, for example, representations later
in our conversation. But I would like to ask
you more of a metaphysical question now. So if
you are right about uh and if mental fictional
is, is right and our mind is just a
useful fiction, then does it, does it exist? I
mean, how do you approach it uh metaphysically do,
does it really exist?
Uh Yeah. Well, here I'm going to, to echo
the response that I mentioned earlier from Dennett a
sort of yes and no or, or sorter as
he says in, in lots of his writings um
uh to, to give you, give you a, a
parallel that I, that I mentioned in the book
and then, and then try to say what I,
what um how I would answer it. Um uh
So I think 11 example that's sometimes used in
in particularly the work of Kendall Walton on, on
metaphor, which I um uh draw upon in the
book is something like talking about clouds as angry.
Um Now, you know, you can say, well, in
fact, it's a bit of a uh overcast day
today, but they were angry. The clouds here were
angry a couple of days ago when we had
a big storm down in Devon. Now, you know,
if you say to me, are there angry clouds?
It looks like the answer is yes and no.
In other words, do I literally think that clouds
have emotions? Uh No. Um Certainly not. Um Are
there clouds that are quite properly called uh angry?
Um According to a certain metaphor? Well, yes, there,
yes, there are. And roughly in the same sort
of way, although of course, it's more complicated with
the mind. I want to say, if you just
ask me flat out, uh does the mind exist?
I want to say, well, if you mean an
inner world and in particular, um the book focuses
on thought. So if you mean are there um
inner states with content that cause us to behave
in a certain way, which is very often what
people just mean by mental states in the literature
or what they mean by the mind? Then I
think the answer is no, that there is there
is not that inner world of representations um caused
by the what we see and causing us to
behave in certain ways and so on. But if
you mean, are there real patterns as Denne would
put it in our behavior that is, that are
picked out by that metaphor, um which is very
often what we really care about in everyday life.
When we're talking about whether people want or think
or desire something, then I think the answer is
yes. So, um so that would be my, the
attempt to make that response seem less evasive. I,
if you mean, is there an inner world of
the kind that I've mentioned? No, if you mean
um uh are there real patterns in our behavior?
Um Such that uh ordinary talk about people's beliefs,
desires and so on, um is often true, sometimes
false um can be right or wrong then yes,
I think there is.
So when it comes to mental states or what
we usually refer to as mental states, those wouldn't
be real.
Again, I, I, the very often, the way that's
talked about, if we, if you say, what do
you mean by mental states? Um VERY often people
will say, well, I mean, in a state, in
the case of, of say beliefs, an inner state
with content that can be true or false, something
like an inner representation and causal powers. Um And
if that's what you mean by mental state, then
I think n no, that they don't exist. Um
But again, as I say, I think the probably
the folk, for instance, and certainly some varieties of
behaviorism and so on. If you said, um, are
their thoughts or are their beliefs or their desires?
I think there's quite a proper sense in which
the answer is. Yes. Um, BECAUSE, um, as I've
said, there are, um, patterns in our behavior that
we pick out perfectly sensibly using that, using that
talk. Yeah.
And so how do you approach then causality? And
how do you explain behavior through the lens of
fictional?
That's a really a really good question. And it's,
and it's often, of course, um a, a kind
of key uh disagreement or point of difference between
what I've broadly speaking, been calling Cartesian and, and
behaviorist. So, so um y you know, I in
everyday life, it seems like we often say things
like, well, why did you go and you know,
why did you walk off the beach and go
to the beach hut? Uh Because, you know, why
did Adam do that? Because he wanted an ice
cream? And, you know, roughly speaking, uh one view
that, that um that many Cartesian would have is
say, well, that's a kind of causal explanation. I'm
pointing to a particular item in my inner machinery.
Um The desire for ice cream that perhaps together
with others um you know, caused me to get
up and, and, and walk to the beach hut.
Whereas of course, the behaviorists will typically give a
different construal of that and say, well, it's more
like, um, uh explaining why the vase broke because
you, because it was fragile. In other words, you're
saying that there's a particular kind of disposition I
have roughly speaking to, to get an ice cream
whenever I get the chance and here was a
chance. Um, uh, SO that we'll, we'll disagree that
they are, they are causal explanations in the sense
that the Cartesian thinks. Um, NOW again, perhaps not
surprisingly that the, I think the fictional view is
somewhere in between. Um So would say, well, look,
um when you, um uh when you say that
someone's does something because they had a particular belief
or desire and so on, what you're doing is
picking, you're not trying to pick out a particular
item of their inner machinery that's caused a particular
form of behavior. You are really just making sense
of a pattern in their behavior, saying it's useful
to treat them as if they had this and
this uh inner machinery. Um But the, um again,
this idea of inner machinery I think is um
you know, to go back to what I said
earlier, at least since the early modern period. Um
One of the ways in which we explain things,
you know, one of the, the, the very common
ways in which we give explanations is by pointing
to a particular kind of mechanism. And that um
by invoking these kind of imagined mechanisms, we're making
sense of behavior would be, that would be the
way that I would, would put it. So we,
we, we do give up this idea that we
are trying to pick out inner causes. That's, that's
true. Nevertheless, there's a sense in which we are
picking out a whole state of somebody. Um uh
um USING that, that fiction.
Well, before we go on, let me just tell
you that the philosophy of mind is one of
those, uh let's call it disciplines that where I,
I mean, it's very easy for my mind to
break while thinking about some of the ideas and
concepts there. It's like when I read about fictional
is I just have that temptation to just uh
go with illuminati is instead
it's easier. Why, why is that? Um
uh I, I mean, I mean, I don't know,
it's perhaps easier for me just because I was
trained more as a scientist and a philosopher to
understand the I is. But I don't know.
Yeah. Well, of course, one of the, the things
a fiction would want to say probably there is
um that, that even though limit might seem an
easier path as soon as you step out of
the philosophy room and try to interact with your
fellow human beings, uh You, you will find that
you will uh reach for saying what they think
or want or hope and so on. And, um,
and that, that language is, is pretty much indispensable
and I guess that's, that's one way in which
fix is often, often motivated. Um, YEAH,
that's, that's totally fair, totally fair topics you also
talk about in the book is self knowledge. So,
according to the fictional view, how do we find
out about ourselves? And by the way, does the
concept of self apply here?
Hm. Um, IT'S a good, a good question and,
and, um, let, let me start with the, with
self knowledge and then, and then try to try
to, to broaden out a little bit. Um, I
think so that the topic of, you know, thinking
about self knowledge is, is of course extremely important
for, not only for the fictions but also for
all sorts of, um, what I call non Cartesian
positions like, like behaviorism. Um And, you know, there's
the classic joke that many people will repeat in
their, in their, um, you know, first lectures on
philosophy of mind of two behaviorists meet on the
street and one of them says you're fine, how
am I? Um, THE, the thought being that there's
a, you know, behaviorism and related positions is denying
a really obvious fact about mental life, which is
that we have a particular way of finding out
about our own minds. Um, um, THAT is very
different from the way in which we find out
about other people's if indeed we can. So, um,
and, and of course, in the sense of, in
the case of mental fictional is, it's particularly um
a an issue because I seem to be granting
that this idea of an inner world is there
and part and parcel of folk psychology. And yet
I'm telling you not to treat it too seriously.
So, so one way to put the challenge from
introspection or self knowledge for the fiction is, is
to say, well, look, you're telling me that we
don't have mental states in the sense of inner
states with content, but I can just look inside
and see that I have them, right? I um
so how can fictional is be uh um a
viable, a viable view, right? So that, that's 11
way to put it. Um And I guess what
I would want to say here is that, that,
that I, in a sense we have as it
were two stages to this one is the thought
that, well, is there an asymmetry between the way
that we know about our own minds and the
way that we know about other people's and if
there is, which it seems that there is, well,
what does that show? What does it? And, and
you know, one very common response is to say,
well, it shows that there's a certain special faculty
of introspection that's, that's, that gives us access to
the mind in a, in a fundamentally different way.
And I suppose roughly speaking, there's a long story
to tell here. But roughly speaking, I would want
to say Well, look, there is an asymmetry here.
We, we do typically um know more about our
own mind than we know about other people's. Um
But you can, as it were explain that asymmetry
without needing to appeal to a special faculty of
introspection and without um uh nnnn needing to reject
fictional. So let, let me, let me say what
I mean by that. So um so, so the,
the, the key case here, it seems that the
key thing to remember is that mainly I'm talking
about thoughts. In other words, I'm talking about what
philosophers would sometimes call propositional attitudes and, and related,
sort of roughly speaking, cognitive aspects of mind, like
concepts and understanding and so on. And now, of
course, um there are also sensations like a, a
sort of, you know, a pain in my stomach
or a, a feeling hot or, or a more
tricky case, perhaps a fiction is sort of he
um hearing, talking to myself, like inner speech as
it's often described. Um And in the case of
sensations, it does seem like there's AAA marked asymmetry
here. I mean, if I have a kind of
minor, you know, pain in my stomach, um Well,
um you know, uh I feel that, you know,
I, so in a sense, although it's quite misleading
to put it in these terms, I'm, I'm um
I know that I'm in pain or perhaps better
to say, I just feel it. I just feel
that I'm in pain. If it's not a very
sharp pain that doesn't have me rolling around on
the floor, you may not know. So there does
seem like there's an asymmetry in um with regard
to sensations between um the awareness or the knowledge
that I have and the way that awareness that
you would, you would have of those. I think
what I'd want to say though is we shouldn't
move too quickly from that asymmetry in talking about
sensations to um uh to um think that that
shows that the mind as a whole is an
inner world or that we have that special access
to the mind as a whole and in particular,
when it comes to, to thoughts. So, so the,
the key point here I think is that when
we come to make sense of our own behavior
and our own sensations, we do need to make
sense of them and in particular, the step from
how we're behaving or what sensations we're having to,
our thoughts is um still an interpretive step where
we draw upon all the resources of, of folks
like. So, you know, um if I had a
little grumbling in my stomach before I had this,
this uh meeting this interview with you, um And
I did, um and you know, I could think
to myself. Oh OK. Uh Am I um apprehensive
about this interview? Am I, am I worried about
how it will, will go? Um You know, do
I hope it will go well and so on.
Um And then I realized, oh, no, no, I
haven't eaten my lunch yet. I've just been so
busy. I've forgotten that I haven't eaten my sandwich
and I, I was just, in other words, you
know, uh and this is something that Gilbert Ryle
emphasized, um, uh really nicely as well that these
sensations that we have don't come hallmarked as Ryle
puts it, they don't come with a particular stamp
saying this is a grumble of hunger or this
is a grumble of nerves or what have you.
And, and so, so that would be my thought
that we, we do, we have only, we have
our sensations. Uh We spend a lot of time
with ourselves compared to the time that we spend
with other people even uh um uh uh close
um family and friends. We, if you're anything like
me, we say things to ourselves. Um SOMETIMES out
loud. Um YOU know, um sometimes uh um in,
in, in a speech, in a, a kind of
quasi sensational way, but still the key point is
strictly speaking, even when we're having those sensations of
inner speech, we're not listening to our thoughts. Um
We uh we have to take a step of
interpreting those sensations to get to the question of
what do we think? What have we decided to
do? What do we judge? And that's where fictional
comes in, I think. Yeah.
And so let's talk a little bit more about
mental representations. That's something that you mentioned earlier and
you mentioned specifically external representations if I remember correctly.
So what do philosophers of mind really mean when
they mention or talk about representations? What is a
mental representation specifically? And what kinds of representations would
apply in the case of fictional?
That's a good uh uh Yeah, a good, a
good question. Um uh There's a sense in which
I'm not the right person to answer the question
of, of what mental representations are cos I, I
don't think we have any. Um So that's one
of the, the sort of um uh uh perhaps
radical or counterintuitive um uh a aspects of, of
mental fiction is. Um So, but I'll, but I'll
try to, I'll, I'll try to give AAA an,
an overview of how the idea is normally understood
and then tell you what, what I would, what
I would like to say. Um So, so I
guess, you know, the, the, the problem here is
what, what is usually called the problem of intentionality
or the, the problem of um explaining um about
n or content. And, and of course, when you,
when you raise the question, that way you can
see that on the face of it, at least
there are all sorts of representations in the world.
In other words, there are all sorts of um
things, states processes, what have you that seem to
be about other things, states processes or to have
content. So um obvious examples are, you know, I'm
I'm saying words, I'm making disturbances in the air
that are being captured on, on um hopefully captured
by this microphone. Um And um you know, uh
then resulting in a, I'm gonna show my limits
and my technical knowledge here resulting in some distribution
of magnetic, you know, uh o on um uh
uh alignments on a hard drive or what have
you, right? So, so the there are on the
face of it, it seems lots of different representations
from spoken and written language to road signs to
um uh um Semaphore and all, all, all sorts
of uh of different things. Um And uh and
in amongst those are our thoughts or our beliefs
and desires, we would typically say, well, they also
have content, you know, if I have the belief
that um uh Derby is in England. Um Well,
then that's a belief that's about a certain city.
Um AND um uh and England and my belief
could be true or false and, and so on.
So, thoughts seem to be one of these um
things in the world that have content. And roughly
speaking, I suppose the question is, well, how do
you explain that? How, how do you explain how
these things get their content and the, the view
that would look to mental representations, I suppose. Um
uh Does that offers that explanation by as it
were seeing a certain kind of dependence or hierarchy,
it says, well, ultimately, although um there are, there
are lots of in phenomena with, there are representations
or with content marks on a page disturbances in
the air and so on. Ultimately, they all get
their content from thought from uh um people's beliefs
and desires of writers or readers and so on
and people's uh and thoughts get their content from
inner representations, right? So, and as I've said that,
that view, that's roughly speaking, what I've been calling
Cartesian is now applied to, to thoughts and representational
is, is a general term that people would use
there. And you can find it um in Descartes,
you can find it in hume and uh lock
and so on. Um And you can find it
in uh much of cognitive science as well. Um
And of course, they'll talk about those representations in
different ways. Some of them might think they're predominantly
language like other people might see them as more
picture like and so on. Perhaps other sorts of
formats that you find in, in connection is, for
instance. Um um And they, you know, you could
have that view and be a dualist. I think
these things are non-physical more commonly nowadays, you would
think that they are, they're somehow um realized in
the brain for instance. So, um uh so, so
the one way to put it would be that
mental representations in the first instance, are a sort
of um nowadays usually understood as a kind of
theoretical posit that we use to explain behavior. And
that gives an explanation for um the how our
thoughts have content. And from there have l how
language have content and so on. So the view
that I want to propose basically goes exactly the
other way around. Uh ROUGHLY speaking, I'm, I'm certainly
not alone in, in having this uh th this,
this view um in some sense, m many people
might see something like this in the later Wittgenstein.
Although of course, there's always big questions of the
right interpretation to have there. Um um But roughly
speaking, I would want to say, well, of all
the intentional phenomena of all the things with language,
it's it with content, it's really language that comes
first. So I would want to say it's what
comes first really is um uh uh um language
and external representations that um uh represent ultimately due
to social norms and conventions. It's cos we're social
creatures who um follow certain norms within those practices
that we have those norm, government practices, we use
marks, we write things down on bits of paper
to label things and so on. Um That's ultimately
where content and intentionality comes into the world. And
then what happens? I think in the um a
concept of mind is, as I said earlier, we
then project that um intentionality, that kind of content
that we have through our um uh life as
normal governed um social creatures um into an imagined
inner world to make sense of what people are
doing, even when they're not writing things down, uh
or saying things and so on. So, so that's
a long answer because it's a big topic. But
I guess that's, that would be how I would,
would understand it. So, so um for the fiction,
this then the, the, the kind of um the
sort of lesson at the end there is that
mental representations don't exist, these inner, inner sentences, inner
pictures, these inner states with content don't exist, but
they are a metaphorical projection of representations that do
exist like language and they're very useful for making
sense of people.
So I would like to ask you now about
the extended mind thesis, you talk about it in
the book and then you also give a fictional
approach to the idea of extended mental states. But
before we get into your approach, what is the
extended mind? If this is exactly how does it
approach? Um BASICALLY the relationship between mental states and
items of material culture. And then what would you
say uh without uh having a fictional approach to
it? What are basically its weaknesses?
OK. Um So I'll start by trying to say
what the extended mind um thesis in its sort
of canonical form is and then, and then try
to, to tell you what I, how I would
want to reinterpret it. So um I guess the,
the, the canonical form due to, to Andy Clark
and, and David Chalmers in a, in an extraordinarily
influential paper from 25 years ago. Now, gosh, uh
is um is roughly the idea that the skull
isn't that important when it comes to the mind.
Um uh And um the classic thought experiment that,
that um some of your, your viewers might know
is this thought experiment of, of Otto and Inger.
So in Clark and Chalmers paper, they tell this,
this um story about someone called uh um INGE,
let's start with INGE and she um uh hears
about the uh an exhibition on, at the museum
of Bob Knight. Um And she thinks for a
moment, thinks, oh, the museum is on, I think
53rd Street. Uh I should know by now how
many times I've heard this example, but I always
have to check myself uh 53rd street and she
sets off, right? And, and now, now here's a
parallel case that or at least Parker Chalmers want
to say it's an importantly parallel case of Otto
and Otto, somebody who suffers from memory loss. And
so because of that, he carries a notebook with
him wherever he goes to write down important information.
So Otto hears about the exhibition, he looks up
the address of Moma in his notebook, the museum
in his notebook. Um AND he sets off and
roughly speaking, the guiding idea here is that, um,
well, the entries that are written in Otto's notebook
are playing the right causal role, roughly speaking, the
same causal role as, um, uh, whatever say, um,
pattern of neurons are encoding or realizing, um, uh,
inger and biological memory. And so, um, we ought
to say that the notebook, um, uh, counts as
hold that the entries in the notebook are Otto
his beliefs, right? Because, um, they are playing in
the, um, in the relevant respects the right causal
role to count his beliefs. So, only a kind
of skin and skull prejudice is it sometimes, but
only a sort of, um, uh, a, a prejudice
that leads us to say, well, surely mind or
memory or belief that all can, uh, must be
inside here would lead us to, um, to deny
that there are lots of complications with that argument.
There are lots of other ways of putting it.
So I'm aware that aficionados of the extended mind
might, might think that's too, too quick. But the,
the point I would want to make is that
at least as it's presented in the, the paper
by Clark and Chalmers in that canonical form, the,
the, the extended mind thesis, even though it's caused
an awful lot of debate over the last 25
years or so. And some people see it as
a very radical idea. Um, uh, THAT notice that
it accepts the, the basic view of the mind.
Um, THAT is often called representational, right? In other
words, it, it seems to accept the idea that
a what a belief is, is a certain um
representation, a certain bit of information that's playing a
particular causal role. And perhaps in all cases on
the earth, in which there are, there is nobody
perhaps that relies on their notebook quite to the
extent. Otto does. That means that beliefs will always
be in here, right? But what the clock and,
and Chalmers example does is show us that in
some special but not science fiction circumstances, some item
of information could play that causal role, the causal
role. It has to have to count as a
belief from outside the head. Uh HUH. So, so
that's ii I take it one way of putting
the the main claim of the extended mind thesis
that beliefs could be outside the head. Um If
we have a certain item of information playing the
right um uh causal role that the folk attribute
to, to beliefs. Um Now, um so that's, that's
the, so we can call that a sort of
representation list take on the extended mind thesis because
it seems to accept this basic view about what
beliefs are and just show that given that conception
of beliefs as a an item of information playing
a certain causal role, you could in principle have
that outside the head. Of course, the fiction rejects
that idea. That's, that's I wouldn't say that's not
what beliefs are. And so that, so I now
have to say, well, what, what would the fictional
take on this be? And again, I uh a
little bit like what I just said about mental
representation. I want to say that if what the
extended mind thesis says is, well, in most cases,
and most actual cases anyway, um the beliefs are
um uh inside the head or items of mental
representations playing a certain c causal role inside the
head. But sometimes under special circumstances, like Otto, they
could extend outside. I wouldn't say, well, the fiction
is view is almost exactly the opposite. It says
really all of our talk about the mind is
a metaphorical projection in the other direction from the
outside, in, from exter. So think about memory. Um
YOU know, w we often talk about memory and
this is a, a way of talking about memory
that stretches back. Um You know, 2000 years or
so, we can talk about memory as a kind
of information storage as, as um in other way
words, is we use the external practices that we
have for writing down and storing information as a
metaphor for making sense of um of what memory
is. Um So I think the way I would
put it is what Clark and Chalmers have done
in this example of Otto is to really nicely
capture one of the central metaphors that we use
um to talk about memory, which is roughly speaking,
as a sort of ever present trusty notebook that
we keep in, in our head where we write
down important information and, and move on. Um So,
so what is a very strange case from that
perspective where he's someone who literally does have a
notebook that he's using in that kind of way.
And that's why we, you know, I think they're
right to say that we find it natural to,
to talk about memory in that sort of case.
So, so that's, that's as it were the heart
of it. I want to say that the basic
move from the fiction list is in the opposite
direction to extend in my thesis. To say it's
really um external representations that we see that we're
familiar with that ground, our con our concept of
mind, even when we're talking about Inger, right? Even
when we, we're basically, when we say I inga
um remembers where the museum is. We're basically saying
you can make sense of by her behavior by
saying it's as if she had it written down
in a little notebook in her head, even though
she doesn't print. So that's the basic story. Now,
what I would want to say then though is
that I do think there's a really important um
uh insight behind the extended mind thesis, which I
think it's really important that fiction is captures and
I, I hope it does capture it, which is
to say in an enormous amount of our daily
activity, um we are thoroughly dependent on external tools.
Um And that when we attribute mental states, we
talk about people understanding or, or, you know, believing
or desiring and so on, we very often don't
mind whether as it were they have to rely
on those tools or not. So, so one example
I've written about is understanding in science. I mean,
it's very often the case that in order to
attribute what we think is required for understanding the
capacities that are required for that scientists have to
rely on pen and paper and computers and so
on. And uh and, and we're fine with that
in, in many, many, there are certain special circumstances
like exams where we might bar people from having
some tools but, but in many other cases not.
So, so what I would say is w the
really important insight, there's a really important insight of
the extended mind thesis. And I think fiction can
capture that by saying, look what, what are we
doing? When we talk about the mind, we're trying
to make sense of people's behavior and we're using
a certain stock of metaphors like memories, information storage,
say to make sense of their behavior. But when
we do that, we often don't really mind whether
or not, right, in order to, to realize that
pattern of behavior, they have to rely on using
all sorts of tools and devices, right? Um So
you can imagine a case in which Otto say
is really nervous when he wanders around a big
city. So imagine he doesn't have the notebook, but
he has a stress ball on him. Right. So,
uh and I I in a big city, he's
fine if he's got his stress ball to keep
him calm. Um But not otherwise. So, so in
this case, it might be that we can make
sense of Otto's behavior by saying, um, well, he
knows where the museum is, even if he's having
to rely on this external device, in order to
realize the right pattern of behavior, like walking to
the, the correct street and so on, or you
can think of all sorts of other cases, you
know, he has a map on him which he
can look at, it doesn't have the name of
the museum written down, say that he just needs
to look at it and sort of orientate himself.
So again, he may realize the right pattern of
behavior to count as, um uh you know, believing
that the museum is on 53rd street where it
is. Um, HE can't do that, let's say without
the device, but with something like a map to
orientate himself or a stress ball to keep him
calm. What have you, he can. And I think
in everyday life, you'd be fine saying, you know,
we're gonna meet Otto at the museum. Does he
know where it is? Yes, that's fine. And you
wouldn't uh take back that, that attribution if you
knew that he had to have a street map
on him. I think that's um so I think
there is a really important, it's a long answer.
I think there's a, a really important insight here
in the extended mind, thesis about the thoroughness of
our dependence on um tools and external representations in
order to display certain capacities where I think it
goes wrong, at least in the canonical form in
Clark. And Chalmers is by um assuming the representational
list conception of mind. And I think you can,
you can as it were ditch the representational is
but keep the important lesson of the extended mind
thesis and, and doing that, I think you avoid
some problems.
Yeah. By the way, I'm curious since there are
people nowadays that use the extended mind thesis and
apply it in the broader framework that they call
the four e cognition. So apart from the extended
bit, there's also the better than bodied and enacted
mind. Do you think that fictional is, would have
anything at all to say about the other three
s or that perhaps they would uh there are
some insights from them that would also apply to
fictional.
That's a, yeah, that's a really good question. It's
quite a big question because you're quite right to
say that I focused on the Clark and Chalmers
paper from uh you know, 25 years ago. Now,
um there is now, of course, AAA huge movement
um that comes under that heading of for recognition
and, and uh even though the movement might share
the general emphasis on thinking that a kind of
internal is, is a mistake. In other words, a
view that says it's all about the brain, somehow
it's a mistake and we should emphasize body and
environment. There are big theoretical differences between um different
views there. So, so I probably won't be able
to, to encompass it at all. I certainly won't.
Um uh I suppose um that um one thing
to say would be so if we think about
something like the embedded versus extended conception, roughly speaking,
um they um both seem to make sense of
um they both seem to rather to assume something
um that I think that we perhaps shouldn't assume.
Um And that is that, for instance, it makes
sense to ask where beliefs are. So, so one
way in which I think the extended mind position
gets in trouble is people say, well, it's very
strange to say that a belief could be in
a notebook. That seems a very strange thing to
say. And that's quite right. So that, that even
though I've said the folk don't really care that
much often about whether we rely on external devices.
It does sound weird to say a belief is
in a notebook. I guess what I would want
to say is the, the fault there lies with
representational is not with the extended idea. So I
think it's just as strange to say, is my
belief that Derby is in England on the left
or the right side of my head. So I'm
getting confused now because I'm looking in a, uh,
the camera. So I don't, II, I promise, I
do know my left or my right. But, um,
you know, that the real one I'm trying to
say is I think talking about where beliefs are,
is a strange um uh thing to do, right?
That that's at odds with our ordinary conception of
belief. That's of course one thing the jewelers would
say, they'd say, yeah, they're not, they're not in
uh space in the way that tables and chairs
are. But I think the right and the right
reason to give for why that sounds strange is
cos we're speaking metaphorically. So, um example I mentioned
in the book you say about someone, oh, he's
got such a chip on his shoulder and you
say, oh, really? Right or left shoulder right. Now,
if you say that it looks like what you've
done is push a certain metaphor too close to
literal, right? Um And I think the same is
true about asking where beliefs are, whether that's right
or left side of the skull or in notebooks
or outside and so on. So, so that's just
to give one example of it looks on the
face of it like the dividing line between someone
who's an extended uh mind person and someone who's
embedded is um that they both admit the importance
of the environment. But one of them thinks that
the mind literally extends outside the head and the
other one doesn't. And I wouldn't say, I think
the whole thought about the whole question of where
the mind is located is um in a way
a kind of um follow on from Cartesian is
a sort of implication of Cartesian is that we
should um that we should reject the mind isn't
really anywhere um in that sense that, that they,
that they need um perhaps just one more thing
to, to mention would be something like in activism.
And II, I think um of course, there are
different forms of in activism too, but at least
one form that um associated with, with authors like
Dan Hatto and E mind would be the, the
also a view that is, is um skeptical about
inner representations, at least in at least in some,
some cases. And I think there, there is a,
an important parallel with fictional is probably the key
difference is that I am a little bit more
conservative in allowing uh people to still carry on
talking about, you know, representations as long as they,
they're careful not to take it too seriously. In
other words, one way to put that would perhaps
a bit too simplistic would be to say that
some expressions of an activism are more likely limit
is about inner representation that we need to learn
to do without this in cognitive science. Whereas I
guess because of perhaps because of being someone who's
worked on models in science in the past, I'm
I'm more comfortable with the thought that um an
awful lot of the representations we use in science
are things that we know are not strictly speaking
true and perhaps taken literally have problems. But we,
we cope with that and we still use them
for various purposes. And I think roughly speaking, I'd
want to say that about inner representations as well.
Yeah, great. So I have one last topic that
I would like to ask you about. You also
refer to it in the book. Uh You also
talk tackle it in the book actually. So uh
dealing with epistemology, then uh does our view of
the mind shape how, for example, we approach the
nature of human knowledge, the nature of inquiry, inquiry,
basically what sort of implications would fictional is, for
example, have for epistemology?
Yeah. Thank you. II, I think it does. And
I think that um uh it's perhaps AAA slightly
strange feature of a, a sort of philosophical landscape
at the moment that that quite often um not
always but quite often debate, say in epistemology um
happens fairly independently from say philosophy of mind. And,
and if you think back, of course, to some
people like the British empiricists, um that, that would
seem quite, quite strange. Um THAT really understanding the
nature of human knowledge was part and parcel of
understanding the mind and its limits. Um And I
suppose that uh it seems to, to me that,
that the notion of mind as an inner world
is not only, of course, um as we said
earlier is not only part and parcel of the
way that we think about the mind in philosophy
and, and um and everyday life, but, but also
part and parcel of how we think about the
whole. Um It were the modern challenge for um
epistemology, you know, if as it's often said, it's,
it's with the early modern period, particularly with Descartes,
that knowledge becomes the central problem for philosophy. The
way that that becomes a problem is often thought
of in terms of this inner world, you know,
and that we are as it were somehow locked
up inside our inner world. And we ask ourselves,
well, how do we know what's outside of that?
How do we know there are other people? How
do we know that there's a, an external world
or what form it takes and so on. So,
so arguably that, that notion of inner world is
sort of lies right at the heart of um
the um the whole conception that, that we have
of what um the problems of philosophy or particularly
the problems of knowledge are in the, in the
modern period. Um And, and, and I if you
think of, say someone like Hume, you know, what,
what is uh what is the response to that?
Well, it's to try to understand the operations of
our inner world, as I say in something like
uh uh and being something like a newton of
the mind in order to understand what we can
talk sensibly about what concepts we can have um
uh where we're talking nonsense. Um And what the
limits of our knowledge can, can be now. So
that means that if you reject that idea of
mind as an inner world, then epistemology and enquiry
looks very different. And roughly speaking, one really important
implication, I think of thinking about the mind in,
in the sort of way that I've tried to,
to set out is that you will think that
mind has a history. In other words, you'll think
that it's not as it were that we have
um a particular um largely fixed inner world with
certain operations that, that um tell us what we
can uh talk sensibly about what we can know
and so on. It's more that um we have
during the course of our history um created all
sorts of external devices and tools, right from, you
know, ancient Greek mathematics up to computer simulations and
so on that expand the range of capacities that
we have for um describing the world, for predicting
it for um understanding it and so on. And
so the, the, the, as it were charting the,
the nature and the limits of the human mind
is about charting a whole complex set of practices
that are built up over the course of generations
and generations and involve keep incorporating more and more
um sorts of um uh devices, tools, representations and,
and so on. Um And that, that, that really
understanding the nature of enquiries about understanding those practices.
And that really, that's what an awful lot of
our um uh concepts that we use in epistemology,
like knowledge and understanding and inference. That's really what
they're describing, they're describing those complex practices of interaction
um with tools in certain social environments,
right? So this is probably a good point to
end on. Uh And the book is again mine
as a metaphor, a defense of mental fictional is
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
box of the interview and Doctor Tun just before
we go apart from the book, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Ah Well, um So AAA good question if you
um uh you go to my website. So if
you search for me, you'll find my University of
Exeter web pages. Um And I suppose that the
perhaps the the most interesting thing for, for people,
if, if they've made it to the end of
this interview, uh might be a link that's included
there to um some lectures I I gave called
the Frega lectures at the University of Tartu in
December last year. Um And those lectures were based
on um the book and cover a lot of
the topics that we've talked about in more depth.
So, so if people are interested, if you go
to my website and follow that link, it will
direct you to the University of Tartu and you
can um watch recordings of those of those lectures.
Great. Uh I will add that to the description
box of the interview then and Doctor Tun, thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. I really love the book
so I hope that my audience also loves it
and buys it. So, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
And it's been a real pleasure to talk with
you.
Thank you. It's been great.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego and
Jan Punter Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi na me, Gary G Alman, Sam of
Zal Ari and Y. Polton John Barboza, Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca, La Gilon
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa, Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey,
then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor. Luke Neeson,
Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica week in
the B brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George
Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar, Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers, these our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller
Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all.